README.md, before:

# SortByShlong – Desktop Icon Shape Arranger for Windows

SortByShlong is a lightweight, headless Windows utility that rearranges your desktop icons into a predefined comedic shape. It demonstrates advanced Windows shell automation while providing a clean, extensible architecture for future shape layouts and script-driven configurations.

Unlike traditional UI-driven applications, this tool executes silently and is designed to be triggered by:
1. A simple **console harness** used for development and direct execution.
2. A planned **Windows Explorer context menu extension** that adds a new option: `Sort by → Penis`.

The first release includes one shape provider:
- **PenisShapeProvider**

---

## Features
- Programmatically rearranges desktop icons using Win32 ListView messages
- Headless execution with no GUI components
- Clean modular architecture for additional shapes
- Designed for future support of a scriptable shape definition language
- Provides a console tool for easy debugging and testing
- Shell extension integration planned for Windows Explorer

---

## Solution Structure
```
/icon-arranger
  /src
    /IconArranger.Core              # Layout engine, Win32 interop, shape providers
    /IconArranger.ConsoleHarness    # CLI runner for execution and testing
    /IconArranger.Shell             # (Future) C++ COM shell extension
  /docs
    ARCHITECTURE.md
    TESTING.md
    SHELL_INTEGRATION.md
    SHAPE_LANGUAGE_FUTURE.md
```

---

## Technologies
- **C# .NET 8** for the core library and testing harness  
- **C++ Win32 COM** for the future Explorer context menu extension  
- **P/Invoke** for desktop ListView interaction  

The application targets Windows exclusively due to its reliance on Win32 APIs and Explorer internals.

---

## Core Components

### Interfaces
- `IDesktopIconProvider` — retrieves icon metadata  
- `IIconLayoutApplier` — applies updated icon coordinates  
- `IShapeProvider` — generates layout points for each shape  
- `IShapeRegistry` — manages shape providers  
- `IShapeScriptEngine` — reserved for future script-generated shapes  

### Initial Implementations
- `DesktopIconService`
- `PenisShapeProvider`
- `ShapeRegistry`
- `NoopShapeScriptEngine`

---

## How the Engine Works
1. Enumerate desktop icons  
2. Determine desktop working bounds  
3. Generate the desired layout coordinates  
4. Apply the new icon positions  

The initial invocation pattern:
```
ArrangeDesktopIcons("penis")
```

---

## Console Harness Usage
The console harness is the primary entry point during early development.

### Default execution
```bash
dotnet run --project IconArranger.ConsoleHarness
```

### Specify shape explicitly
```bash
dotnet run --project IconArranger.ConsoleHarness -- --shape=penis
```

### List available shapes
```bash
dotnet run --project IconArranger.ConsoleHarness -- --list-shapes
```

### Help
```bash
dotnet run --project IconArranger.ConsoleHarness -- --help
```

**Important:** Running this tool will rearrange your actual desktop icons.

---

## Build Instructions

### Restore and build
```bash
dotnet restore
dotnet build -c Release
```

### Publish as a self-contained executable
```bash
dotnet publish IconArranger.ConsoleHarness/IconArranger.ConsoleHarness.csproj   -c Release   -r win-x64   --self-contained true   /p:PublishSingleFile=true   -o ./publish
```

### Run tests
```bash
dotnet test
```

---

## Shell Extension (Future Work)
The project intends to provide a shell extension that:
- Adds a new context menu entry under `Sort by`
- Launches the console harness upon selection

Development details will be documented in:
```
docs/SHELL_INTEGRATION.md
```

This integration will be added once the core engine is stable.

---

## Documentation
- **ARCHITECTURE.md** – Full system layout and design overview  
- **TESTING.md** – Guidance for manual and automated testing  
- **SHELL_INTEGRATION.md** – COM extension design notes  
- **SHAPE_LANGUAGE_FUTURE.md** – Concepts for script-based shape logic  

---

## Disclaimer
SortByShlong is a humorous but technically serious utility.  
Use responsibly — icon rearrangement affects your active desktop layout.

Enjoy, explore, and extend.

Commit message:

Update build outputs and assembly info
Regenerated binaries, PDBs, and assembly info for SortBySchlong.Core, ConsoleHarness, and Core.Tests projects. Includes updated SourceLink references and document layout metadata. No source code changes detected.

README.md, after:

# SortByShlong – Desktop Icon Shape Arranger for Windows

SortByShlong is a lightweight, headless Windows utility that rearranges your desktop icons into a predefined comedic shape. It demonstrates advanced Windows shell automation while providing a clean, extensible architecture for future shape layouts and script-driven configurations.

Unlike traditional UI-driven applications, this tool executes silently and is designed to be triggered by:
1. A simple **console harness** used for development and direct execution.
2. A planned **Windows Explorer context menu extension** that adds a new option: `Sort by → Penis`.

The first release includes one shape provider:
- **PenisShapeProvider**

---

## Features
- Programmatically rearranges desktop icons using Win32 ListView messages
- Headless execution with no GUI components
- Clean modular architecture for additional shapes
- Designed for future support of a scriptable shape definition language
- Provides a console tool for easy debugging and testing
- Shell extension integration planned for Windows Explorer

---

## Solution Structure
```
/icon-arranger
  /src
    /IconArranger.Core              # Layout engine, Win32 interop, shape providers
    /IconArranger.ConsoleHarness    # CLI runner for execution and testing
    /IconArranger.Shell             # (Future) C++ COM shell extension
  /docs
    ARCHITECTURE.md
    TESTING.md
    SHELL_INTEGRATION.md
    SHAPE_LANGUAGE_FUTURE.md
```

---

## Technologies
- **C# .NET 8** for the core library and testing harness  
- **C++ Win32 COM** for the future Explorer context menu extension  
- **P/Invoke** for desktop ListView interaction  

The application targets Windows exclusively due to its reliance on Win32 APIs and Explorer internals.

---

## System Requirements & Compatibility

- **Operating System**: Windows 10 and Windows 11
- **Monitor Support**: Multiple monitor configurations are fully supported
- **.NET Runtime**: .NET 8.0 or later

The application automatically detects and works with the primary desktop ListView window, making it compatible with both single and multi-monitor setups. Icon arrangements are calculated based on the detected desktop bounds, ensuring proper positioning across all monitor configurations.

---

## Core Components

### Interfaces
- `IDesktopIconProvider` — retrieves icon metadata  
- `IIconLayoutApplier` — applies updated icon coordinates  
- `IShapeProvider` — generates layout points for each shape  
- `IShapeRegistry` — manages shape providers  
- `IShapeScriptEngine` — reserved for future script-generated shapes  

### Initial Implementations
- `DesktopIconService`
- `PenisShapeProvider`
- `ShapeRegistry`
- `NoopShapeScriptEngine`

---

## How the Engine Works
1. Enumerate desktop icons  
2. Determine desktop working bounds  
3. Generate the desired layout coordinates  
4. Apply the new icon positions  

The initial invocation pattern:
```
ArrangeDesktopIcons("penis")
```

---

## Console Harness Usage
The console harness is the primary entry point during early development.

### Default execution
```bash
dotnet run --project IconArranger.ConsoleHarness
```

### Specify shape explicitly
```bash
dotnet run --project IconArranger.ConsoleHarness -- --shape=penis
```

### List available shapes
```bash
dotnet run --project IconArranger.ConsoleHarness -- --list-shapes
```

### Help
```bash
dotnet run --project IconArranger.ConsoleHarness -- --help
```

**Important:** Running this tool will rearrange your actual desktop icons.

---

## Build Instructions

### Restore and build
```bash
dotnet restore
dotnet build -c Release
```

### Publish as a self-contained executable
```bash
dotnet publish IconArranger.ConsoleHarness/IconArranger.ConsoleHarness.csproj   -c Release   -r win-x64   --self-contained true   /p:PublishSingleFile=true   -o ./publish
```

### Run tests
```bash
dotnet test
```

---

## Shell Extension (Future Work)
The project intends to provide a shell extension that:
- Adds a new context menu entry under `Sort by`
- Launches the console harness upon selection

Development details will be documented in:
```
docs/SHELL_INTEGRATION.md
```

This integration will be added once the core engine is stable.

---

## Documentation
- **ARCHITECTURE.md** – Full system layout and design overview  
- **TESTING.md** – Guidance for manual and automated testing  
- **SHELL_INTEGRATION.md** – COM extension design notes  
- **SHAPE_LANGUAGE_FUTURE.md** – Concepts for script-based shape logic  

---

## Disclaimer
SortByShlong is a humorous but technically serious utility.  
Use responsibly — icon rearrangement affects your active desktop layout.

Enjoy, explore, and extend.
